A 75-year-old man is brought to hospital with an episode of dizziness. He still feels unwellwhen he is seen 30 min after the onset. He was well until the last 6 months, since whenhe has had some falls, irregularly. On some occasions he lost consciousness and is unsurehow long he has been unconscious. On a few occasions he has fallen, grazing his knees,and on others he has felt dizzy and has had to sit down but has not lost consciousness.These episodes usually happened on exertion, but once or twice they have occurred whilesitting down. He recovers over 10–15 min after each episode.He lives alone and most of the episodes have not been witnessed. Once his granddaughterwas with him when he blacked out. Worried, she called an ambulance. He looked so paleand still that she thought that he had died. He was taken to hospital, by which time he hadrecovered completely and was discharged and told that he had a normal electrocardiogram(ECG) and chest X-ray.There is no history of chest pain or palpitations. He has had gout and some urinary fre-quency. A diagnosis of benign prostatic hypertrophy has been made for which he is on notreatment. He takes ibuprofen occasionally for the gout. He stopped smoking 5 years ago.He drinks 5–10 units of alcohol weekly. The dizziness and blackouts have not been asso-ciated with alcohol. There is no relevant family history. He used to work as an electrician.

He is pale with a blood pressure of 96/64 mmHg. The pulse rate is 33/min, regular. Thereare no heart murmurs. The jugular venous pressure is raised 3 cm with occasional rises.There is no leg oedema; the peripheral pulses are palpable except for the left dorsalis pedis.The respiratory system is normal 

 1The blackouts do not seem to have had any relationship to posture. They have been a mix-ture of dizziness and loss of consciousness. The one witnessed episode seems to have beenassociated with loss of colour. This suggests a loss of cardiac output usually associated withan arrhythmia. This may be the case despite the absence of any other cardiac symptoms.There may be an obvious flushing of the skin as cardiac output and blood flow return.The normal ECG and chest X-ray when he attended hospital after an episode do not rule outan intermittent conduction problem. On this occasion the symptoms have remained in amore minor form. The ECG shows third-degree or complete heart block. There is completedissociation of the atrial rate and the ventricular rate which is 33/min. The episodes of lossof consciousness are called Stokes–Adams attacks and are caused by self-limited rapid tachy-arrhythmias at the onset of heart block or transient asystole. Although these have beenintermittent in the past he is now in stable complete heart block and, if this continues, theslow ventricular rate will be associated with reduced cardiac output which may causefatigue, dizziness on exertion or heart failure. Intermittent failure of the escape rhythm maycause syncope.1Electrocardiogram showing complete heart block, p-waves arrowed.!The differential diagnosis of transient loss of consciousness splits into neurologicaland vascular causes. A witness is very helpful in differentiation. Neurological causesare various forms of epilepsy, often with associated features. Vascular causes arerelated to local or general reduction in cerebral blood flow. Local reduction mayoccur in transient ischaemic attacks or vertebrobasilar insufficiency. A more globalreduction, often with pallor, occurs with arrhythmias, postural hypotension andvasovagal faints.Differential diagnosisOn examination, the occasional rises in the jugular venous pressure are intermittent ‘can-non’ a-waves as the right atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve. In addition,the intensity of the first heart sound will vary The treatment should be insertion of a pacemaker. If the rhythm in complete heart blockis stable then a permanent pacemaker should be inserted as soon as this can be arranged.This should be a dual-chamber system pacing the atria then the ventricles (DDD, dualsensing and pacing, triggered by atrial sensing, inhibited by ventricular sensing) or pos-sibly a ventricular pacing system (VVI, pacing the ventricle, inhibited by ventricular sens-ing). If there is doubt about the ventricular escape rhythm then a temporary pacemakershould be inserted immediately.
5When a patient suffers transient loss of consciousness, a careful history from a witnessmay help with the diagnosis.Normal examination and ECG do not rule out intermittent serious arrhythmias.Large waves in the jugular venous pressure are usually regular giant v-waves in tricuspidregurgitation or intermittent cannon a-waves in complete heart block
-----
A 34-year-old male accountant comes to the emergency department with acute chestpain. There is a previous history of occasional stabbing chest pain for 2 years. The currentpain had come on 4 h earlier at 8 pm and has been persistent since then. It is central inposition, with some radiation to both sides of the chest. It is not associated with shortnessof breath or palpitations. The pain is relieved by sitting up and leaning forward. Twoparacetamol tablets taken earlier at 9 pm did not make any difference to the pain.The previous chest pain had been occasional, lasting a second or two at a time and withno particular precipitating factors. It has usually been on the left side of the chestalthough the position had varied.Two weeks previously he had an upper respiratory tract infection which lasted 4 days. Thisconsisted of a sore throat, blocked nose, sneezing and a cough. His wife and two childrenwere ill at the same time with similar symptoms but have been well since then. He has a his-tory of migraine. In the family history his father had a myocardial infarction at the age of51 years and was found to have a marginally high cholesterol level. His mother and two sis-ters, aged 36 and 38 years, are well. After his father’s infarct he had his lipids measured; thecholesterol was 5.1 mmol/L (desirable range/H110215. He is a non-smoker who drinks15 units of alcohol per week.

His pulse rate is 75/min, blood pressure 124/78 mmHg. His temperature is 37. There isnothing abnormal to find in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
6
A chest X-ray is normal. The haemoglobin and white cell count are normal. The creatinekinase level is slightly raised. Other biochemical tests are normal Electrocardiogram 

 2The previous chest pains lasting a second or two are unlikely to be of any real signifi-cance. Cardiac pain, and virtually any other significant pain, lasts longer than this, andstabbing momentary left-sided chest pains are quite common. The positive family historyincreases the risk of ischaemic heart disease but there are no other risk factors evidentfrom the history and examination. The relief from sitting up and leaning forward is typicalof pain originating in the pericardium. The ECG shows elevation of the ST segment whichis concave upwards, typical of pericarditisand unlike the upward convexity found in theST elevation after myocardial infarction.The story of an upper respiratory tract infection shortly before suggests that this may wellhave a viral aetiology. The viruses commonly involved in pericarditis are Coxsackie Bviruses. The absence of a pericardial rub does not rule out pericarditis. Rubs often vary inintensity and may not always be audible. If this diagnosis was suspected, it is often worthlistening again on a number of occasions for the rub. Pericarditis often involves some adja-cent myocardial inflammation and this could explain the rise in creatine kinase.Pericarditis may occur as a complication of a myocardial infarction but this tends to occura day or more later – either inflammation as a direct result of death of the underlying heartmuscle, or as a later immunological effect (Dressler’s syndrome). Pericarditis also occursas part of various connective tissue disorders, arteritides, tuberculosis and involvementfrom other local infections or tumours. Myocardial infarction is not common at the age of34 years but it certainly occurs. Other causes of chest pain, such as oesophageal pain ormusculoskeletal pain, are not suggested by the history and investigations.Thrombolysis in the presence of pericarditis carries a slight risk of bleeding into the peri-cardial space, which could produce cardiac tamponade. This arises when a fluid (an effu-sion, blood or pus) in the pericardial space compresses the heart, producing a paradoxicalpulse with pressure dropping on inspiration, jugular venous pressure rising on inspirationand a falling blood pressure. In this case, the evidence suggests pericarditis and thrombol-ysis is not indicated. The ECG and enzymes should be followed, the patient re-examinedregularly for signs of tamponade, and analgesics given.A subsequent rise in antibody titres against Coxsackie virus suggested a viral pericarditis.Symptoms and ECG changes resolved in 4–5 days. An echocardiogram did not suggest anypericardial fluid and showed good left ventricular muscle function. The symptoms settledwith rest and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
8ST segment elevation which is concave upwards is characteristic of pericarditis.Viral pericarditis in young people is most often caused by Coxsackie viruses.Myocarditis may be associated with pericarditis, and muscle function should be assessedon echocardiogram, and damage from creatine kinase and troponin measurements
-----
A 19-year-old boy has a history of repeated chest infections. He had problems with a coughand sputum production in the first 2 years of life and was labelled as bronchitic. Over the next14 years he was often ‘chesty’ and had spent 4–5 weeks a year away from school. Over the past2 years he has developed more problems and was admitted to hospital on three occasions withcough and purulent sputum. On the first two occasions, Haemophilus influenzaewas grownon culture of the sputum, and on the last occasion 2 months previously Pseudomonas aerugi-nosawas isolated from the sputum at the time of admission to hospital. He is still coughing upsputum. Although he has largely recovered from the infection, his mother is worried and askedfor a further sputum to be sent off. The report has come back from the microbiology labora-tory showing that there is a scanty growth of Pseudomonason culture of the sputum.There is no family history of any chest disease. Routine questioning shows that his appetiteis reasonable, micturition is normal and his bowels tend to be irregular.

On examination he is thin, weighing 48 kg and 1.6 m (5 ft 6 in) tall.The only finding in the chest is of a few inspiratory crackles over the upper zones ofboth lungs. Cardiovascular and abdominal examination is normal 

 3The chest X-ray shows abnormal shadowing throughout both lungs, more marked in bothupper lobes with some ring shadows and tubular shadows representing thickened bronchialwalls. These findings would be compatible with a diagnosis of bronchiectasis. The pul-monary arteries are prominent, suggesting a degree of pulmonary hypertension. The distri-bution is typical of that found in cystic fibrosiswhere the changes are most evident in theupper lobes. Most other forms of bronchiectasis are more likely to occur in the lower lobeswhere drainage by gravity is less effective. High-resolution computed tomography (CT) ofthe lungs is the best way to diagnose bronchiectasis and to define its extent and distribu-tion. In younger and milder cases of cystic fibrosis, the predominant organisms in the spu-tum are Haemophilus influenzaeandStaphylococcus aureus. Later, as more lung damageoccurs,Pseudomonas aeruginosais a common pathogen. Once present in the lungs in cys-tic fibrosis, it is difficult or impossible to remove it completely.Cystic fibrosis should always be considered when there is a story of repeated chest infec-tions in a young person. Although it presents most often below the age of 20 years, diag-nosis may be delayed until the 20s, 30s or even 40s in milder cases. Associated problemsoccur in the pancreas (malabsorption, diabetes), sinuses and liver. It has become evidentthat some patients are affected more mildly, especially those with the less common geneticvariants. These milder cases may only be affected by the chest problems of cystic fibrosisand have little or no malabsorption from the pancreatic insufficiency.
10!The differential diagnosis in this young man would be other causes of diffusebronchiectasis such as agammaglobulinaemia or immotile cilia. Respiratory functionshould be measured to see the degree of functional impairment. Bronchiectasis in theupper lobes may occur in tuberculosis or in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosisassociated with asthma.Differential diagnosisThe common diagnostic test for cystic fibrosis is to measure the electrolytes in the sweat,where there is an abnormally high concentration of sodium and chloride. At the age of 19 years, the sweat test may be less reliable. It is more specific if repeated after the adminis-tration of fludrocortisone. An alternative would be to have the potential difference acrossthe nasal epithelium measured at a centre with a special interest in cystic fibrosis. Cysticfibrosis has an autosomal recessive inheritance with the commonest genetic abnormality/H9004F508 found in 85 per cent of cases. The gene is responsible for the protein controllingchloride transport across the cell membrane. The commoner genetic abnormalities can beidentified and the current battery of genetic tests identifies well over 95 per cent of cases.However, the absence of /H9004F508 and other common abnormalities would not rule out cys-tic fibrosis related to the less common genetic variants.In later stages, lung transplantation can be considered. Since the identification of thegenetic abnormality, trials of gene-replacement therapy have begun.Milder forms of cystic fibrosis may present in adolescence and adulthood.Milder forms are often related to less common genetic abnormalities.A high-resolution CT scan is the best way to detect bronchiectasis and to define its extent
-----
A 26-year-old teacher has consulted her general practitioner (GP) for her persistent cough.She wants to have a second course of antibiotics because an initial course of amoxicillinmade no difference. The cough has troubled her for 3 months since she moved to a newschool. The cough is now disturbing her sleep and making her tired during the day. Sheteaches games, and the cough is troublesome when going out to the playground and onjogging. In her medical history she had her appendix removed 3 years ago. She had hertonsils removed as a child and was said to have recurrent episodes of bronchitis betweenthe ages of 3 and 6 years. She has never smoked and takes no medication other than anoral contraceptive. Her parents are alive and well and she has two brothers, one of whomhas hayfever.

The respiratory rate is 18/min. Her chest is clear and there are no abnormalities in the nose,pharynx, cardiovascular, respiratory or nervous systems.
Chest X-ray is reported as normal.Spirometry is carried out at the surgery and she is asked to record her peak flow rate athome, the best of three readings every morning and every evening for 2 weeks.Spirometry results are as follows:Actual PredictedFEV1(L) 3.4FER (FEV1/FVC) (%) 78 75–80PEF (L/min) 470 440–540FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; FER, forced expira-tory ratio; PEF, peak expiratory flow.1Peak flowrecording at home over 11days 

 4The peak flow pattern shows a degree of diurnal variation. This does not reach the diag-nostic criteria for asthmabut it is suspicious. The mean daily variation in peak flow fromthe recordings is 36 L/min and the mean evening peak flow is 453 L/min, giving a meandiurnal variation of 8 per cent. There is a small diurnal variation in normals and a vari-ation of/H1102215 per cent is diagnostic of asthma. In this patient the label of ‘bronchitis’ as achild was probably asthma. The family history of an atopic condition (hayfever in abrother), and the triggering of the cough by exercise and going out in to the cold also sug-gest bronchial hyper-responsiveness typical of asthma.Patients with a chronic persistent cough of unexplained cause should have a chest X-ray.When the X-ray is clear the cough is likely to be produced by one of three main causes innon-smokers. Around half of such cases have asthma or will go on to develop asthma overthe next few years. Half of the rest have rhinitis or sinusitis with a post-nasal drip. In around20 per cent the cough is related to gastro-oesophageal reflux. A small number of cases willbe caused by otherwise unsuspected problems such as foreign bodies, bronchial ‘adenoma’,sarcoidosis or fibrosing alveolitis. Cough is a common side-effect in patients treated withangiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.In this patient the diagnosis of asthma was confirmed with an exercise test which wasassociated with a 25 per cent drop in peak flow after completion of 6 min vigorous exer-cise. Alternatives would have been another non-specific challenge such as methacholineor histamine, or a therapeutic trial of inhaled steroids.After the exercise test, an inhaled steroid was given and the cough settled after 1 week.The inhaled steroid was discontinued after 4 weeks and replaced by a /H92522-agonist to usebefore exercise. However, the cough recurred with more evident wheeze and shortness ofbreath, and treatment was changed back to an inhaled steroid with a /H92522-agonist asneeded. If control was not established, the next step would be to check inhaler techniqueand treatment adherence and to consider adding a long-acting /H92522-agonist. In some cases,the persistent dry cough associated with asthma may require more vigorous treatmentthan this. Inhaled steroids for a month or more, or even a 2-week course of oral steroidsmay be needed to relieve the cough. The successful management of dry cough relies onestablishing the correct diagnosis and treating it vigorously.
12The three commonest causes of persistent dry cough with a normal chest X-ray areasthma (50 per cent), sinusitis and postnasal drip (25 per cent) and reflux oesophagitis(20 per cent).Asthma may present as a cough (cough variant asthma) with little or no airflow obstruction initially, although this develops later.Persistent cough with normal chest examination is unlikely to have a bacterial cause orrespond to antibiotic treatment This page intentionally left blank
-----
A 56-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of abdominalpain. Twenty-four hours previously she developed a continuous pain in the upperabdomen which has become progressively more severe. The pain radiates into the back.She feels nauseated and alternately hot and cold. Her past medical history is notable for aduodenal ulcer which was successfully treated with Helicobactereradication therapy 5 years earlier. She smokes 15 cigarettes a day, and shares a bottle of wine each eveningwith her husband.

The patient looks unwell and dehydrated. She weighs 115 kg. She is febrile, 38.5°C, herpulse is 108/min and blood pressure 124/76 mmHg. Cardiovascular and respiratory systemexamination is normal. She is tender in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium, withguarding and rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds are sparse.
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLWhite cell count 19.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 239/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 137 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 116/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 19/H9262mol/L 3–17/H9262mol/LAlkaline phosphatase 58 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase (AAT) 67 IU/L 5–35 IU/LGamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 72 IU/L 11–51 IU/LC-reactive protein (CRP) 256 mg/L/H110215 mg/L Plain abdominalX-ray 

 5This woman has acute cholecystitis. Cholecystitis is most common in obese, middle-agedwomen, and classically is triggered by eating a fatty meal. Cholecystitis is usually causedby a gallstone impacting in the cystic duct. Continued secretion by the gallbladder leadsto increased pressure and inflammation of the gallbladder wall. Bacterial infection is usu-ally by Gram-negative organisms and anaerobes. Ischaemia in the distended gallbladdercan lead to perforation causing either generalized peritonitis or formation of a localizedabscess. Alternatively the stone can spontaneously disimpact and the symptoms spontan-eously improve. Gallstones can get stuck in the common bile duct leading to cholangitisor pancreatitis. Rarely, gallstones can perforate through the inflamed gallbladder wall intothe small intestine and cause intestinal obstruction (gallstone ileus). The typical symptomis of sudden-onset right upper quadrant abdominal pain which radiates into the back. Inuncomplicated cases the pain improves within 24 h. Fever suggests a bacterial infection.Jaundice usually occurs if there is a stone in the common bile duct. There is usuallyguarding and rebound tenderness in the right upper quadrant (Murphy’s sign).In this patient the leucocytosis and raised CRP are consistent with acute cholecystitis. Ifthe serum bilirubin and liver enzymes are very deranged, acute cholangitis due to a stonein the common bile duct should be suspected. The abdominal X-ray is normal; the major-ity of gallstones are radiolucent and do not show on plain films.
16!The major differential diagnoses of acute cholecystitis include perforated pepticulcer, acute pancreatitis, acute hepatitis, subphrenic abscess, retrocaecal appendicitisand perforated carcinoma or diverticulum of the hepatic flexure of the colon.Myocardial infarction or right lower lobe pneumonia may also mimic cholecystitis.Differential diagnosisThis patient should be admitted under the surgical team. Serum amylase should be meas-ured to rule out pancreatitis. Blood cultures should be taken. Chest X-ray should be per-formed to exclude pneumonia, and erect abdominal X-ray to rule out air under thediaphragm which occurs with a perforated peptic ulcer. An abdominal ultrasound willshow inflammation of the gallbladder wall. The patient should be kept nil by mouth, givenintravenous fluids and commenced on intravenous cephalosporins and metronidazole.The patient should be examined regularly for signs of generalized peritonitis or cholangi-tis. If the symptoms settle down the patient is normally discharged to be readmitted in afew weeks once the inflammation has settled down to have a cholecystectomy.Acute cholecystitis typically causes right upper quadrant pain and a positive Murphy’s sign.Potential complications include septicaemia and peritonitis
-----
A 66-year-old woman, a retired nurse, consults her general practitioner (GP) with a 4-month history of tiredness, slight breathlessness on exertion and loss of weight from 71to 65 kg. Her appetite is unchanged and normal, she has no nausea or vomiting, but overthe last 2 months she has had an altered bowel habit with constipation alternating withher usual and normal pattern. She has not seen any blood in her faeces and has had noabdominal pain. There is no relevant past or family history, and she is on no medication.She has smoked 20 cigarettes daily for 48 years and drinks 20–28 units of alcohol a week.

She has slight pallor but otherwise looks well. No lymphadenopathy is detected, and herbreasts, thyroid, heart, chest and abdomen, including rectal examination, are all normal.The blood pressure is 148/90 mmHg.
17
NormalHaemoglobin 10.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 76 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 4.0/H11003109/LPlatelets 277/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 142 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 106/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LUrinalysis: no protein, no bloodBlood film shows a microcytic hypochromic picture 

 6The microcytic, hypochromic anaemia and the altered bowel habit, the only symptomreferable to the gastrointestinal tract, point to a carcinoma of the colon, which would alsoexplain her weight loss. A barium enema revealed a neoplasm in the sigmoid colon, con-firmed by colonoscopy and biopsy. Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound showed no pul-monary metastases and no intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy or hepatic metastasesrespectively.She proceeded to a sigmoid colectomy and end-to-end anastamosis, and was regularlyfollowed-up for any evidence of recurrence. Histology showed a grade I tumour.Carcinoma of the colon is increasing in frequency. If it presents at an early stage then the prospect for cure is good. Rectal bleeding, alteration in bowel habit for longer than 1 month at any age, or iron-deficient anaemia in men or postmenopausal women are indi-cations for investigation of the gastrointestinal tract.Smoking is a risk factor for carcinoma of the colon.
18Carcinoma of the colon can present with few or no symptoms or signs in the gastro-intestinal tract.Carcinoma of the colon must be considered as a cause of iron-deficient anaemia
-----
A man of 45 consults his general practitioner (GP) with a 6-month history of reducedappetite and weight loss, from 78 to 71 kg. During the last 3 months he has had intermit-tent nausea, especially in the mornings, and in the last 3 months the morning nausea hasbeen accompanied by vomiting on several occasions. For 1 month he has noted swellingof his ankles. Despite his weight loss he has recently noticed his trousers getting tighter.He has had no abdominal pain. He has no relevant past history and knows no family history as he was adopted. He takes no medication. From the age of 18 he has smoked 5–6 cigarettes daily and drunk 15–20 units of alcohol per week. He has been a chef all hisworking life, without exception in fashionable restaurants. He now lives alone as his wifeleft him 1 year ago.

He has plethoric features. There is pitting oedema of his ankles. He appears to have lostweight from his limbs, but not his trunk. He has nine spider naevi on his upper trunk. Hispulse is normal and the rate is 92/min. His jugular venous pressure (JVP) is not raised andhis blood pressure is 146/84 mmHg. The cardiovascular and respiratory systems are nor-mal. The abdomen is distended. He has no palpable masses but there is shifting dullnessand a fluid thrill.
19
NormalHaemoglobin 12.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 107 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 10.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 321/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LSodium 131 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 4.7 mmol/LCreatinine 101/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LCalcium 2.65 mmol/LPhosphate 1 

 7This man has abnormal liver function tests which indicate hepatic failure; the hypopro-teinaemia has caused the ascites and ankle swelling. The number of spider naevi is morethan the accepted normal of three. The cause is likely to be alcohol as it is a commoncause of this problem, he is at increased risk through his work in the catering business. Hissymptoms of morning nausea and vomiting are typical, and this would account for hiscushingoid appearance (alcohol increases adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) secre-tion) and the macrocytsis on the blood film (due to dietary folate deficiency and a directtoxic action on the bone marrow by alcohol). However his alcohol intake is too low to beconsistent with the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease. When the provisional diagnosis isdiscussed with him though, he eventually admits that his alcohol intake has been at least40–50 units per week for the last 20 years and has increased further during the last yearafter his marriage had ended, the reason for this being his drinking.The slight reductions in the sodium and urea reflect a chronic reduced intake of salt andprotein; the rise in bilirubin is insufficient to cause jaundice.Further investigations are the measurement of hepatitis viral serology, which was nega-tive, and an ultrasound of the abdomen. This showed a slight reduction in liver size, andan increase in splenic length of 2–3 cm. There was no evidence of a hepatoma. These find-ings indicate that portal hypertension has developed. A liver biopsy, performed to confirmthe diagnosis, assess the degree of histological damage and exclude other pathology,showed changes of cirrhosis.The crucial aim in management is to impress upon the patient the necessity to stop drink-ing alcohol, in view of the degree of liver damage, the presumed portal hypertension andthe risk of oesophageal varices and bleeding, and to effect this by his attending an alco-hol addiction unit. In the short term he should also improve his diet to increase his pro-tein intake. Diuretics could be used to reduce his oedema, but it should be rememberedthat they could cause postural hypotension more easily against this background.His attendance at the addiction unit was fitful, he continued to drink heavily and he died3 years later as a result of a second bleed from oesophageal varices.
20Patients who drink excessive amounts of alcohol will often disguise this fact in their historyAlcoholic liver disease has a poor prognosis if the alcohol intake is not terminated
-----
A 22-year-old man presented with malaise and anorexia for 1 week. He vomited on oneoccasion, with no blood. He has felt feverish but has not taken his temperature. For 2 weeks he has had aching pains in the knees, elbows and wrists without any obviousswelling of the joints. He has not noticed any change in his urine or bowels.Five years ago he had glandular fever confirmed serologically. He smokes 25 cigarettes perday and drinks 20–40 units of alcohol per week. He has taken marijuana and ecstasy occa-sionally over the past 2 years and various tablets and mixtures at clubs without being sureof the constituents. He denies any intravenous drug use. He has had irregular homosexualcontacts but says that he has always used protection. He claims to have had an HIV testwhich was negative 6 months earlier. He has not travelled outside Western Europe in thelast 2 years.He is unemployed and lives in a flat with three other people. There is no relevant familyhistory.

He has a temperature of 38.6°C and looks unwell. He looks as if he may be a little jaun-diced. He is a little tender in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. There are no abnor-malities to find on examination of the joints or in any other system.
21
NormalHaemoglobin 14.7 g/dLMean corpuscular volume (MCV) 85 fL 80–99 fLWhite cell count 11.6/H11003109/LPlatelets 286/H11003109/L 150–440/H11003109/LProthrombin time 17 s 10–14 sSodium 135 mmol/L 135–145 mmol/LPotassium 3.7 mmol/LCreatinine 64/H9262mol/L 70–120/H9262mol/LBilirubin 50 mmol/L 3–17 mmol/LAlkaline phosphatase 376 IU/L 30–300 IU/LAlanine aminotransferase 570 IU/L 5–35 IU/LFasting glucose 4 

 8The diagnosis is likely to be acute viral hepatitis. The biochemical results show abnormalliver function tests with a predominant change in the transaminases, indicating a hepato-cellular rather than an obstructive problem in the liver. This might be caused by hepatitis A,B or C. The raised white count is compatible with acute hepatitis. Homosexuality and intra-venous drug abuse are risk factors for hepatitis B and C. Other viral infections such ascytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus are possible.Since the drug ingestion history is unclear, there is a possibility of a drug-induced hepatitis.The prodromal joint symptoms suggest a viral infection as the cause, and this is more com-mon with hepatitis B. Serological tests can be used to see whether there are immunoglobu-lin M (IgM) antibodies indicating acute infection with one of these viruses, to confirm thediagnosis. The reported negative HIV test 6 months earlier makes an HIV-associated condi-tion unlikely although patients are not always reliable in their accounts of HIV tests, andHIV seroconversion should also be considered.Treatment is basically supportive in the acute phase. The prothrombin time in this patientis raised slightly but not enough to be an anxiety or an indicator of very severe disease.Liver function will need to be measured to monitor enzyme levels as a guide to progress.Alcohol and any other hepatotoxic drug intake should be avoided until liver function testsare back to normal. If hepatitis B or C is confirmed by serology then liver function testsand serological tests should be monitored for chronic disease, and antiviral therapy thenconsidered. Rare complications of the acute illness are fulminant hepatic failure, aplasticanaemia, myocarditis and vasculitis. The opportunity should be taken to advise him aboutthe potential dangers of his intake of cigarettes, drugs and alcohol, and to offer himappropriate support in these areas.
22Viral hepatitis is often associated with a prodrome of arthralgia and flu-like symptoms.Confirmatory evidence should be sought for patients’ reports of HIV test results
-----
